Jehovah God’s inspired Word
makes this significant declaration
at Titus 2:11.
It reads:
“For the undeserved kindness of God
has been manifested,
“bringing salvation
to all sorts of people.”
Yes, “to all sorts of people”
—this was true in the first century,
and it’s true today more than ever before.
We are a worldwide brotherhood
made up of “all sorts of people”
who have come to a knowledge of the truth,
and we have made the decision
to serve Jehovah.
In this symposium,
we will discuss three sorts of people:
first, those whose mates
are not yet Jehovah’s Witnesses;
second, those who are being raised
by one believing parent or relative;
and third, those who are single.
Many brothers and sisters
who find themselves in these situations
are successfully putting up
“a hard fight for the faith,”
as stated in Jude 3.
And all of them are valuable assets
to the congregation.
So as we discuss each situation
during this symposium,
please focus your attention
on those who are in the congregation
that you attend
and ask yourself,
‘How can I show my appreciation
for brothers and sisters
who have these circumstances?’
And ask yourself,
‘If I am in one of the situations
being discussed,
‘what will help me to continue
to fight successfully for the faith?’
This talk will focus
on Christians with unbelieving mates.
For a well-known example,
we look back to the first century
to a woman named Eunice,
the mother of Timothy.
She is referred to at Acts 16:1,
which says that Timothy was
“the son of a believing Jewish woman
but of a Greek father.”
So it refers to Eunice as a believing woman,
but it does not refer to Timothy’s father
as a believing man.
The point is that Timothy’s father
was not a Christian.
Nevertheless, Eunice, his mother,
along with Lois, his grandmother,
taught Timothy the holy writings
—the truth as found in God’s Word.
When we speak of unbelieving mates,
we recognize that their circumstances
are not all the same.
Some non-Witness mates oppose true worship.
Others are indifferent.
And others may be tolerant,
even somewhat interested and supportive,
but they may not be progressing
toward baptism.
Some mates of believers are baptized,
but they have weakened spiritually.
They may no longer be regular at meetings,
go in service,
or participate in family worship.
And last of all, sad to say,
some mates are disfellowshipped.
But we never give up on unbelieving mates,
and we always hope
that any who are disfellowshipped
will come to their senses, repent,
and return to Jehovah.
Is there something that we as publishers
in the congregation can do
to show appreciation for fellow believers
whose mates are not yet serving Jehovah?
Yes, there is,
and the apostle Paul tells us
at Philippians 3:17
that we can learn from their good example
and imitate them.
Philippians 3:17 says:
“Unitedly become imitators of me, brothers,
“and keep your eye on those
who are walking in a way
that is in harmony
with the example we set for you.”
So Paul tells us
to look closely at his example
and the fine example of others
in the congregation.
Among those setting a fine example
are brothers and sisters
who have unbelieving mates.
They have worked hard to maintain
a strong relationship with Jehovah.
They have cultivated self-discipline
to keep a good schedule
of theocratic activities.
And many have become proficient in balancing
family obligations with spiritual pursuits.
It’s not easy, but they are doing it.
So how should we view them and treat them?
We do what Philippians 2:4 tells us to do.
We “look out
not only for [our] own interests,
but also for the interests of others.”
That means that we show concern
for their well-being.
We treat them with respect.
We certainly do not ignore them.
We recognize that as spiritual people,
they have much to offer.
Isn’t it wonderful that we are family
and we belong to one another?
We take brothers and sisters who have
unbelieving mates into account,
and we look out for their interests
as the scripture states
because we love them
and we see their good qualities.
So, what can we do?
Whenever possible,
we should include them in our activities.
But what else can we do?
We can show interest in their mates
and try to help them spiritually.
For example, if circumstances allow,
invite them with their mates
for a meal or to a gathering.
You know that friendliness
and upbuilding conversation
can have a powerful effect
on a person’s heart.
As you watch the following video,
think about how you can show appreciation
for any in your congregation
whose mates
are not presently serving Jehovah.
It was when my husband was really opposed.
One night, he put a knife to his stomach
and said,
“Will you choose me or the truth?”
My husband was cooperative.
He would wave goodbye
as we went to the meetings,
but he wasn’t interested at all.
I felt really jealous
when I saw families
sitting together at assemblies.
Because of work
and taking care of his mother,
my husband gradually started missing
meetings.
Some in our congregation,
with good intentions,
pointed it out to him.
But the way they did this
made him feel misunderstood
and discouraged,
and he put the Bible
and the publications away.
I also had times when I wanted
to drift away with him.
I was really happy when I learned the truth.
In my zeal, I bombarded my husband
with information,
and that made him worry
that I had turned into a fanatic.
I think he was genuinely concerned
for his family
and thought that I had joined
a weird religion.
One family in the congregation
often invited us to meals
and outdoor activities.
I think my husband appreciated
those small acts of kindness.
I also tried to show that I appreciated him
through my speech and conduct.
When my children and I applied
what we learned in our lives,
I think he gradually became interested
in the truth.
The words “safeguard your heart”
caught my eye.
I decided to try and keep my heart
and my children’s hearts
toward Jehovah.
When I went out in the ministry
with my children,
I would point out various aspects
of God’s creation around us.
And before my husband
would come home from work,
I made it a habit to teach them God’s Word.
I made a conscious effort
to see myself in Paradise with my husband.
This strengthened my resolve
to never leave the truth.
I wrote caring notes to my husband
when I went to the meetings.
I was convinced
that he would come back one day,
and he did come back.
I did not leave Jehovah,
and so Jehovah never abandoned me.
My husband never embraced the truth.
However, right now all five
of my children are in the truth,
and I feel really blessed.
Being able to serve Jehovah as a family
along with my husband
—the joy and appreciation
just keep welling up.
What did we learn from the video?
We learned that believing mates
who display fine Christian qualities
can have a positive influence on mates
who are not yet serving Jehovah.
So, what will help you
to keep on fighting for the faith?
Wisdom and strength
that only Jehovah can provide.
Remember, his power is unlimited
and he finds pleasure in showing favor
to those who trust in him.
Also, you know that he loves you
and that he listens to sincere prayers
from those who want to do things his way.
The combination of God’s love,
prayer, and his spirit
can give you the strength
and the wisdom you need
to maintain a balanced routine
of spiritual activities
while making sure to care
for your family responsibilities.
In the video, the believing mates
took advantage
of all the spiritual food that was available
to build themselves up.
And Jehovah helped them to display
the spiritual qualities of patience and tact.
You know as well as I do that at times
we may not be as tactful as we should be.
Being patient and tactful is not always easy,
especially when you’re tired
and feel disappointed
by your mate’s words or actions.
And yet, regardless of your situation,
Jehovah can supply you with the power
to keep setting a fine example
as you keep on praying
that your mate will eventually respond
to the truth.
At 1 Peter 3:1, 2
—1 Peter 3:1, 2—
we find this very wise and practical counsel.
First Peter 3:1, 2 reads:
“In the same way,
“you wives, be in subjection
to your husbands,
“so that if any are not obedient to the word,
“they may be won without a word
“through the conduct of their wives,
“because of having been eyewitnesses
“of your chaste conduct
together with deep respect.”
Isn’t that wonderful?
The counsel that Peter gives
is tested and true.
Its application has helped
an untold number of unbelieving mates
to accept the truth.
And when you think about it,
it is truly amazing
how deep respect and fine conduct
can win over an unbelieving mate
without a word being spoken.
Of course, as you work
what is good toward your mate,
there undoubtedly will be opportunities
to speak about the truth
and provide spiritual assistance
when circumstances permit
and it seems appropriate.
So keep on setting a fine example
and praying that your mate
will respond to the truth.
Have faith in the inspired words
that Paul wrote
at 1 Corinthians 7:16
—1 Corinthians 7:16—
and remember to continue to show
a positive attitude toward your mate.
First Corinthians 7:16 poses two questions
but with a positive slant.
Chapter 7 and verse 16 reads:
“For wife, how do you know
“whether you will save your husband?
“Or, husband, how do you know
whether you will save your wife?”
Yes, this text is telling us
to remain positive
about the possibility
of a mate taking the truth.
And it is a fact
that many unbelieving mates
have accepted the truth
because of observing a husband or a wife
who follows God’s direction.
Therefore, we continue to hope wholeheartedly
that in time unbelieving mates
will respond to the truth
and find pleasure in serving Jehovah.
As you apply divine counsel from God’s Word,
be assured that with Jehovah’s help,
you can continue to be
a successful fighter for the faith
and bring honor to Jehovah God.
Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will consider the next talk,
“Successful Fighters for the Faith
—Those Being Raised by Single Parents.”